---
layout: posts
title: "The 20 top-cited Machine Translation* papers of 2018 and 2019"
published: true
excerpt: Let's take a first look at the 20 top-cited machine translation papers from 2018 and 2019.
author: Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt
---

## Idea

During one of the poster sessions of ACL 2022 in Dublin a few days ago, I came up with the idea to look back at more recent MT papers and the impact they had. A "test-of-time"-like review if you will, but with an MT-focus and on more recent papers that could still be interesting from a current deployment or reproducibility perspective. This is a first attempt and finding out what the community is thinks is useful right now. As a proxy, I choose citation counts since publication and rank based on that. 

For now, I chose the two years between 2018 and 2019 as a compromise between recency and time passed to accumulate citations. I also separate the years so that younger papers do not get out-crowded by earlier papers that had more time to collect citations. The number of papers (20) is a compromise between wanting to go a bit deeper and the amount of time I can spend on this. I also believe that the very top (say top-10) might be a too limited view on the field. So is top-20, probably. The search queries are listed below, it's worth going a few pages deeper if you are interested. Another reason I chose 2018 as the starting point is that Transformers were already firmly established and hence many things should carry over to today.

In the future, I may pick a couple of those papers that I find particularly interesting and discuss them in more detail, see how they hold up 3-4 years later and - if I am particularly interested in them - check if I am able to meaningfully reproduce or generalize the results. This list is a start. I might do 2020 and 2021, too, but the results there will probably be less informative due to shorter time for accumulating citation counts. On the other hand that will be even more cutting edge.

In general, there is a lot of papers in these lists that I will have to (re-)read soon. Most of them I have at least seen before, but a whole bunch is new to me.

## Method and Caveats

I am simply searching on Semantic Scholar for all papers from the date range I am interested in and contain the term "machine translation" (in the title?). That is of course very crude. I am not quite sure, but it seems that Semantic Scholar is limiting the results to the paper title and there is no option to change that (hence the asterisk in the title of the post). If anyone has a better idea how to achieve a less limiting search, let me know.

I have chosen Semantic Scholar over Google Scholar since it seems that Google does not allow to sort search results by citation count which makes the task somewhat impossible there. Also, it should be noted that Semantic Scholar still seems to drastically undercount citations compared to Google, I am not doing anything about that here.

I am omitting papers from the search result if the listed date is not from the exact year in the query. Seems that happens when papers appear on Arxiv first and are later published in "proper" venues. I am using the first date, but that might be the wrong thing to do. This results for instance in dropping the first two entries from the search for 2018 since they appeared on Arxive in 2017. Other than that I am not doing any selection. 

That may result in papers being listed that strictly speaking are not "on machine translation" but just happen to use it for other things. Entry 19 in 2019 might be an example for that, but it is still interesting if viewed as an application of MT in a different field. 

Here you can see the exact search query for as long as the query format for Semantic scholar does not change after publication of this post. The results are not going to be stable though due to changing citation counts:

* [Semantic Scholar search results for 2018](https://www.semanticscholar.org/search?year%5B0%5D=2018&year%5B1%5D=2018&publicationType%5B0%5D=JournalArticle&publicationType%5B1%5D=Conference&q=machine%20translation&sort=total-citations){:target="_blank"}
* [Semantic Scholar search results for 2019](https://www.semanticscholar.org/search?year%5B0%5D=2019&year%5B1%5D=2019&publicationType%5B0%5D=JournalArticle&publicationType%5B1%5D=Conference&q=machine%20translation&sort=total-citations){:target="_blank"}

If available, I use a mash-up of the ACL plain text citation format and the markdown citation to produce the entries. Citations counts are added based on the today's number from Semantic Scholar. For other sources I used the Chicago-style citation from Semantic Scholar and adjust it to resemble the ACL format a bit closer. I guess it would be good to automate this somehow so that the lists can change over time, but that would have been too much work at the moment. Maybe someone wants to pick this up a project.

If you disagree with any of my choices here, let me know in the comments. I am open to workshopping this.

## The 20 top-cited Machine Translation papers of 2018

1. Guillaume Lample, Myle Ott, Alexis Conneau, Ludovic Denoyer, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2018. [Phrase-Based & Neural Unsupervised Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1549). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5039–5049, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 536
2. Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. 2018. [Scaling Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/W18-6301). In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers, pages 1–9, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 464
3. Ashish Vaswani, Samy Bengio, Eugene Brevdo, Francois Chollet, Aidan Gomez, Stephan Gouws, Llion Jones, Łukasz Kaiser, Nal Kalchbrenner, Niki Parmar, Ryan Sepassi, Noam Shazeer, and Jakob Uszkoreit. 2018. [Tensor2Tensor for Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/W18-1819). In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas (Volume 1: Research Track), pages 193–199, Boston, MA. Association for Machine Translation in the Americas. Citations: 372
4. Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Roman Grundkiewicz, Tomasz Dwojak, Hieu Hoang, Kenneth Heafield, Tom Neckermann, Frank Seide, Ulrich Germann, Alham Fikri Aji, Nikolay Bogoychev, André F. T. Martins, and Alexandra Birch. 2018. [Marian: Fast Neural Machine Translation in C++](https://aclanthology.org/P18-4020). In Proceedings of ACL 2018, System Demonstrations, pages 116–121, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 342
5. Mia Xu Chen, Orhan Firat, Ankur Bapna, Melvin Johnson, Wolfgang Macherey, George Foster, Llion Jones, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Ashish Vaswani, Jakob Uszkoreit, Lukasz Kaiser, Zhifeng Chen, Yonghui Wu, and Macduff Hughes. 2018. [The Best of Both Worlds: Combining Recent Advances in Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/P18-1008). In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 76–86, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 323
6. Ondřej Bojar, Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Philipp Koehn, and Christof Monz. 2018. [Findings of the 2018 Conference on Machine Translation (WMT18)](https://aclanthology.org/W18-6401). In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Shared Task Papers, pages 272–303, Belgium, Brussels. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 263
7. Ye Qi, Devendra Sachan, Matthieu Felix, Sarguna Padmanabhan, and Graham Neubig. 2018. [When and Why Are Pre-Trained Word Embeddings Useful for Neural Machine Translation?](https://aclanthology.org/N18-2084). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), pages 529–535, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.
8. Elena Voita, Pavel Serdyukov, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. 2018. [Context-Aware Neural Machine Translation Learns Anaphora Resolution](https://aclanthology.org/P18-1117). In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1264–1274, Melbourne, Australia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 195
9. Jiatao Gu, Hany Hassan, Jacob Devlin, and Victor O.K. Li. 2018. [Universal Neural Machine Translation for Extremely Low Resource Languages](https://aclanthology.org/N18-1032). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 344–354, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 194
10. Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre. 2018. [Unsupervised Statistical Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1399). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3632–3642, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 185
11. Alessandro Raganato and Jörg Tiedemann. 2018. [An Analysis of Encoder Representations in Transformer-Based Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/W18-5431). In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 287–297, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 177
12. Chenhui Chu and Rui Wang. 2018. [A Survey of Domain Adaptation for Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/C18-1111). In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 1304–1319, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 174
13. Lesly Miculicich, Dhananjay Ram, Nikolaos Pappas, and James Henderson. 2018. [Document-Level Neural Machine Translation with Hierarchical Attention Networks](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1325). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2947–2954, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 173
14. Gongbo Tang, Mathias Müller, Annette Rios, and Rico Sennrich. 2018. [Why Self-Attention? A Targeted Evaluation of Neural Machine Translation Architectures](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1458). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 4263–4272, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 169
15. Rachel Bawden, Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, and Barry Haddow. 2018. [Evaluating Discourse Phenomena in Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/N18-1118). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1304–1313, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.
16. Myle Ott, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2018. [Analyzing Uncertainty in Neural Machine Translation](http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/ott18a). Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 80:3956-3965. Citations: 160
17. Samuel Läubli, Rico Sennrich, and Martin Volk. 2018. [Has Machine Translation Achieved Human Parity? A Case for Document-level Evaluation](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1512). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 4791–4796, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 157
18. Matt Post and David Vilar. 2018. [Fast Lexically Constrained Decoding with Dynamic Beam Allocation for Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/N18-1119). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1314–1324, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 156
19. Jiatao Gu, Yong Wang, Yun Chen, Victor O. K. Li, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2018. [Meta-Learning for Low-Resource Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/D18-1398). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3622–3631, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 151
20. Zhen Yang, Wei Chen, Feng Wang, and Bo Xu. 2018. [Improving Neural Machine Translation with Conditional Sequence Generative Adversarial Nets](https://aclanthology.org/N18-1122). In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 1346–1355, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 147

## The 20 top-cited Machine Translation papers of 2019

1. Loïc Barrault, Ondřej Bojar, Marta R. Costa-jussà, Christian Federmann, Mark Fishel, Yvette Graham, Barry Haddow, Matthias Huck, Philipp Koehn, Shervin Malmasi, Christof Monz, Mathias Müller, Santanu Pal, Matt Post, and Marcos Zampieri. 2019. [Findings of the 2019 Conference on Machine Translation (WMT19)](https://aclanthology.org/W19-5301){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Machine Translation (Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, Day 1), pages 1–61, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 314
2. Roee Aharoni, Melvin Johnson, and Orhan Firat. 2019. [Massively Multilingual Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/N19-1388){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 3874–3884, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 255 
3. Qiang Wang, Bei Li, Tong Xiao, Jingbo Zhu, Changliang Li, Derek F. Wong, and Lidia S. Chao. 2019. [Learning Deep Transformer Models for Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1176){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1810–1822, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 249
4. Naveen Arivazhagan, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dmitry Lepikhin, Melvin Johnson, Maxim Krikun, Mia Xu Chen, Yuan Cao, George F. Foster, Colin Cherry, Wolfgang Macherey, Z. Chen, and Yonghui Wu. 2019. [Massively Multilingual Neural Machine Translation in the Wild: Findings and Challenges](https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.05019){:target="_blank"}. ArXiv abs/1907.05019. Citations: 213
5. Francisco Guzmán, Peng-Jen Chen, Myle Ott, Juan Pino, Guillaume Lample, Philipp Koehn, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2019. [The FLORES Evaluation Datasets for Low-Resource Machine Translation: Nepali–English and Sinhala–English](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1632){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 6098–6111, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 166
6. Gabriel Stanovsky, Noah A. Smith, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. [Evaluating Gender Bias in Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1164){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1679–1684, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 155
7. Xu Tan, Yi Ren, Di He, Tao Qin, Zhou Zhao and Tie-Yan Liu. [Multilingual Neural Machine Translation with Knowledge Distillation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10461){:target="_blank"}. ArXiv abs/1902.10461. Citations: 151
8. Yong Cheng, Lu Jiang, and Wolfgang Macherey. 2019. [Robust Neural Machine Translation with Doubly Adversarial Inputs](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1425){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4324–4333, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 141
9. Ankur Bapna and Orhan Firat. 2019. [Simple, Scalable Adaptation for Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1165){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 1538–1548, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 141
10. Wen Zhang, Yang Feng, Fandong Meng, Di You, and Qun Liu. 2019. [Bridging the Gap between Training and Inference for Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1426){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 4334–4343, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 141
11. Rico Sennrich and Biao Zhang. 2019. [Revisiting Low-Resource Neural Machine Translation: A Case Study](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1021){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 211–221, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 133
12. Naveen Arivazhagan, Colin Cherry, Wolfgang Macherey, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Semih Yavuz, Ruoming Pang, Wei Li, and Colin Raffel. 2019. [Monotonic Infinite Lookback Attention for Simultaneous Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1126){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1313–1323, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 118
13. Emmanouil Antonios Platanios, Otilia Stretcu, Graham Neubig, Barnabas Poczos, and Tom Mitchell. 2019. [Competence-based Curriculum Learning for Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/N19-1119){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 1162–1172, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 112
14. Mikel Artetxe, Gorka Labaka, and Eneko Agirre. 2019. [An Effective Approach to Unsupervised Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/P19-1019){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 194–203, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 102
15. Yiren Wang, Fei Tian, Di He, Tao Qin, ChengXiang Zhai and Tie-Yan Liu. 2019. [Non-Autoregressive Machine Translation with Auxiliary Regularization](https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10245){:target="_blank"}. ArXiv abs/1902.10245. Citations: 102
16. Elena Voita, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. 2019. When a Good Translation is Wrong in Context: Context-Aware Machine Translation Improves on Deixis, Ellipsis, and Lexical Cohesion. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 1198–1212, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 100
17. Elena Voita, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. 2019. [The Bottom-up Evolution of Representations in the Transformer: A Study with Machine Translation and Language Modeling Objectives](https://aclanthology.org/D19-1448){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4396–4406, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 89
18. Joel Escudé Font and Marta R. Costa-jussà. 2019. [Equalizing Gender Bias in Neural Machine Translation with Word Embeddings Techniques](https://aclanthology.org/W19-3821){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing, pages 147–154, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 89
19. Michele Tufano, Jevgenija Pantiuchina, Cody Watson, Gabriele Bavota and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2019. [On Learning Meaningful Code Changes Via Neural Machine Translation](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00021){:target="_blank"}. 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). Citations: 88
20. Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt. 2019. [Microsoft Translator at WMT 2019: Towards Large-Scale Document-Level Neural Machine Translation](https://aclanthology.org/W19-5321){:target="_blank"}. In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Machine Translation (Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, Day 1), pages 225–233, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Citations: 87

{% include comments.html issue-number="51" %}
